[#17061] Docs for MyBatis integration with YugabyteDB (#17062)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/drivers-orms/php/laravel.md

---
title: Laravel ORM
headerTitle: Use an ORM
linkTitle: Use an ORM
description: Laravel ORM support for YugabyteDB
headcontent: Laravel ORM support for YugabyteDB
image: /images/section_icons/sample-data/s_s1-sampledata-3x.png
menu:
  preview:
    identifier: laravel-orm
    parent: php-drivers
    weight: 500
type: docs
---

<ul class="nav nav-tabs-alt nav-tabs-yb">

  <li >
    <a href="../laravel/" class="nav-link active">
      Laravel ORM
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

> [Laravel](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/readme) is a php web application framework with expressive, elegant syntax. Along with many features required for web development, Laravel includes [Eloquent](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/eloquent#introduction) ORM which provides a robust and intuitive database ORM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Laravel](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/readme) is a PHP web application framework. Along with many features required for web development, Laravel includes [Eloquent](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/eloquent#introduction) ORM which provides a robust database ORM.
```

> YugabyteDB YSQL API has full compatibility with Laravel's Eloquent ORM for data persistence in php applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
YugabyteDB YSQL API has full compatibility with Laravel's Eloquent ORM for data persistence in PHP applications.
```

> Learn the basic steps required for connecting to the YugabyteDB database using Laravel framework. The full working app using Laravel framework can be found in the [PHP ORM example application](../../orms/php/ysql-laravel/) page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn the basic steps required for connecting to the YugabyteDB database using Laravel framework. The full working application can be found on the [PHP ORM example application](../../orms/php/ysql-laravel/) page.
```

### Step 1: Create a Laravel project

```txt
composer create-project --prefer-dist laravel/laravel yb-laravel-example
```

Note: Review the [prerequisites](../../orms/php/ysql-laravel//#prerequisites) for working with a Laravel project.

### Step 2: Configure the datasource in Laravel project

> Update the `.env` file for configuring the Laravel project to connect to the YugabyteDB cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the `.env` file in the `yb-laravel-example` directory to configure the Laravel project to connect to the YugabyteDB cluster as follows:
```

> Update the `.env` file for configuring the Laravel project to connect to the YugabyteDB cluster.

Reviewer 2: It's better to explicitly mention that the `.env` **inside the** `yb-laravel-example` directory needs to be modified as below.

```txt
DB_CONNECTION=pgsql
DB_HOST=127.0.0.1
DB_PORT=5433
DB_DATABASE=yugabyte
DB_USERNAME=yugabyte
DB_PASSWORD=
```

Given YSQL's compatibility with the PostgreSQL language, the `DB_CONNECTION`  property is set to `pgsql`.

Note: This step assumes that YugabyteDB database is running at `127.0.0.1:5433`.

### Step 3: Generate the Employees Model class

> Eloquent ORM works with database tables using the [Model](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/eloquent#generating-model-classes) classes. Create a new model class `Employees` using the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eloquent ORM works with database tables using the [Model](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/eloquent#generating-model-classes) classes.

In the `yb-laravel-example` directory, create a new model class `Employees` using the following command:
```

> Eloquent ORM works with Database tables using the [Model](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/eloquent#generating-model-classes) classes. Lets create a new model class `Employees` using the below command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eloquent ORM works with database tables using the [Model](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/eloquent#generating-model-classes) classes. Create a new model class `Employees` using the following command:
```

```php
php artisan make:model Employees  --migration
```

> This command generates model classes in `app\Models` directory and migration classes in `database\migrations` directory respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command generates model classes in the `app\Models` directory and migration classes in the `database\migrations` directory respectively.
```

Update the `database\migrations\xxxx_create_employees_table.php` file to define the `employees` table.

```php
    public function up()
    {
        Schema::create('employees', function (Blueprint $table) {
            $table->id();
            $table->string('name');
            $table->integer('age');
            $table->string('email');
        });
    }
```

Update the `app\Models\Employees.php` file to map the columns of the `Employees` table.

```php
class Employees extends Model
{
	public $timestamps = false;
    use HasFactory;

    protected $fillable = [
    	'name',
    	'age',
    	'email',
    ];
}
```

### Step 4: Create a seeder for Employees table

> Laravel provides ability to load a table with data using [seed](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/seeding) and [Eloquent Factories](Eloquent: Factories). Let's create files required for seeding the `Employees` model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Laravel provides the ability to load a table with data using [seed](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/seeding) and [Eloquent Factories](Eloquent: Factories). Create the files required for seeding the `Employees` model as follows.
```

```txt
php artisan make:factory EmployeesFactory
php artisan make:seeder EmployeesSeeder
```

> `EmployeesFactory.php` file will get generated in the `database\factories` directory and `EmployeesSeeder.php` file will get generated in the `database\seeders` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `EmployeesFactory.php` file is generated in the `database\factories` directory and the `EmployeesSeeder.php` file is generated in the `database\seeders` directory.
```

> Add the below code to load 10 dummy employees into `Employees` table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following code to load 10 dummy employees into the `Employees` table:
```

```php
class EmployeesFactory extends Factory
{
    /**
     * Define the model's default state.
     *
     * @return array
     */
    public function definition()
    {
        return [
            'name' => $this->faker->name(),
            'age' => $this->faker->randomNumber(2),
            'email' => $this->faker->unique()->safeEmail,
        ];
    }
}

```

```php
class EmployeesSeeder extends Seeder
{
    /**
     * Run the database seeds.
     *
     * @return void
     */
    public function run()
    {
        \App\Models\Employees::factory(10)->create();
    }
}
```

> ### Step 5: apply the migrations and seed the table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 5: Apply the migrations and seed the table
```

> Laravel provides way to apply the DDLs against the database using [Migrations](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/migrations). The database migrations are generated in `database\migrations` directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Laravel provides a way to apply the DDLs against the database using [Migrations](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/migrations). The database migrations are generated in the `database\migrations` directory. 
```

> Run the below command to create and seed `Employees` table in YugabyteDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following command to create and seed the `Employees` table in YugabyteDB:
```

```sh
php artisan migrate:fresh
php artisan db:seed --class=EmployeesSeeder
```

### Step 6: Create a controller for enabling CRUD for Employees model

Laravel supports automatically generating the controller required for a given model.

```sh
php artisan make:resource EmployeesResource
php artisan make:resource EmployeesCollection
php artisan make:controller EmployeesController
```

> `EmployeesController.php` will get generated under `http/controllers` directory. Add the below content into controller file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`EmployeesController.php` is generated in the `http/controllers` directory. Add the following content to the controller file:
```

```php
<?php

namespace App\Http\Controllers;

use App\Models\Employees;
use Illuminate\Http\Request;

class EmployeesController extends Controller
{
    public function index()
    {
        return Employees::all();
    }
 
    public function show($id)
    {
        return Employees::find($id);
    }

    public function store(Request $request)
    {
        return Employees::create($request->all());
    }

    public function update(Request $request, $id)
    {
        $article = Employees::findOrFail($id);
        $article->update($request->all());

        return $article;
    }

    public function delete(Request $request, $id)
    {
        $article = Employees::findOrFail($id);
        $article->delete();

        return 204;
    }
}
```

> All the below code to `routes\api.php` file to enable HTTP access for performing CRUD against `Employees` table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following code to the `routes\api.php` file to enable HTTP access for performing CRUD against the `Employees` table.
```

```php
Route::get('/employees', function () {
    return EmployeesResource::collection(Employees::all());
});

Route::post('/employees', [EmployeesController::class, 'store']);
```

## Run the project

> 1. Laravel provides a embedded web server to handle the HTTP request. We can start the app using the below command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Laravel provides an embedded web server to handle the HTTP request. Start the application using the following command:
```

```txt
php artisan serve
```

> 2. Create an employee using a POST request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an employee using a POST request.
```

```txt
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/api/employees \
-H "Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded" \
-d "name=yugadev&age=25&email=yugadev@yugabyte.com"
```

> check the database for the new employee

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the database for the new employee:
```

```sql
yugabyte=# select * from employees where name='yugadev';
 id  |  name   | age |        email
-----+---------+-----+----------------------
 201 | yugadev |  25 | yugadev@yugabyte.com
(1 row)
```

> 3. Get the details of all the `Employees` using a GET request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get the details of all the `Employees` using a GET request.
```
